Operate First Community Manifesto

A fairly widespread realization that open source is lagging behind proprietary software when it comes to
cloud computing, specifically in the operation of the cloud, has fostered several things.
One, the Red Hat Office of the CTO started an initiative to work towards making operations as
fundamental as functionality in the upstreams we contribute to and the products we produce.
Another is that consuming public cloud is not always cost effective and standing up an open source
alternative presents many challenges from the skill sets needed to run them and the lack of an open 
source community to address complex operational issues, which leaves potential operators on their own.
Yet another is the creation of OpenInfra Labs by the OpenStack Foundation (OSF) to foster an
upstream geared toward open source cloud operations (Note that the scope neither requires nor is limited
to Openstack specifically, it is intended to be a place where any and all open source cloud projects are
welcome). Still another is a realization that AI aided operations are needed to lower the barriers to open
source cloud operations. These circumstances combine to provide an opportune moment to drive towards bringing
the power of open source to address the functionality of cloud operations. The Manifesto is intended to
help foster an open community initiative to support, advance and coordinate existing and new efforts toward
the ‘Operate First Principle’: the paradigm that, in the age of Cloud, operational excellence must be
encapsulated in software projects and related services; and that open source must therefore consider
operability of their projects in a realistic production cloud environment. Moreover, the operability
of the resulting clouds, which typically incorporate many projects and/or products, must be understood
and engineered to provide a competitive experience for operators wanting to use open source clouds
as a reasonable alternative to proprietary clouds. While we continue to address operability within
various community projects (such as Kubernetes Operators) the lack of an upstream open source
community to advance overall cloud operational considerations is viewed as a threat
to open source’s relevance in the cloud. 

Why?

Imagine a company building airplanes. Not only do they need to design, build and test each component and
subsystem individually and test them together as a whole, they also need to employ pilots to actually fly
the airplane in real world conditions as a critical part of the engineering process.  Feedback from pilots
on the overall flight worthiness of an aircraft is critical for safety, but feedback on the piloting
experience is also important. Do the operational controls, indicators and assists make the aircraft
easier to operate or hinder operation?

For open source clouds we need to consider operational experience and drive toward providing capabilities
that ease the complexity and lower the barrier to entry for both standing up and ongoing operation of open
source clouds. Open source clouds need to address all the operational requirements, such as installation,
upgrading, monitoring operation and use, allocation of resources, hybrid cloud / multi cloud considerations,
security, compliance, etc. With Operate First we will leverage the experience from operational teams of
existing open source clouds that handle real world use cases to provide operational input to projects where
appropriate and sharing expertise and tooling that the community can benefit from.  Having an upstream
community dedicated to overall cloud operation provides an opportunity to leverage the power of open
source to advance cloud operability. When we Operate First, operational knowledge —which has become as
valuable as code itself— becomes the subject of collaboration between communities who use the services
and those who operate them. Being able to actively manage the feedback loop between these communities
will become an open source strength. Providing developers an environment, where they can execute and
operate their software in a production cloud environment, opens the possibility to debug, inspect
and observe their software in real-world scenarios.

Could cloud computing cause open source to lose to proprietary? Clouds are based on open source
technology, but wrapped in non-open source proprietary software that provides an ease of use operational
experience that pure open source does not compete with today. The barrier to entry for pure open source
is thus very high. Operational and user experience expectations have been set by the public cloud vendors.
It’s their lock in. Our efforts to make open source suitable for enterprise use, must now evolve to the
new model for enterprise which utilizes cloud computing. We need to adapt to meet this challenge or risk
diminishing open source’s value and see all the progress made to date become less significant. Cloud has
changed the target for open source, by adding an operational capability that needs to be addressed.

Operate First needs to include operating the open source cloud at scale to ensure open source cloud
operators expectations are properly set and met.


Key tenets

With Operate First we will utilize open source production cloud environments to allow developers to
evaluate their functionality as well as operability, at scale with real world workloads. Developers can
evaluate quality, performance and scale, using open source software in an open source production
cloud environment, catching issues, ensuring scale and improving operations as we go. Drawing
projects into the cloud will establish a direct link between cloud operators and open source projects
to provide a feedback loop for identifying issues and resolving them. And where appropriate, ideally
moving toward better utilization of Continuous Deployment to catch issues closer to
the source, to improve response and drive improvements. We will push operability into a targeted upstream
where a wider community can participate and drive an open source solution for cloud operation. Also we
will strive to feedback operational consideration to various upstreams to ensure that operational
considerations are built-in and robust for the technologies they nurture. We will measure our cloud
operator experience against best in class proprietary competitors to drive toward a first class experience
for our open source clouds. The environment for upstream communities to run their software will provide
a “Best effort community SLA”.

How?

With Operate First, our community will open up operational knowledge to all open source communities
to improve the integration and operability from the source.  We need to establish a tight connection
between our cloud operators and open source developers. We will look at existing efforts and find a
consensus on a true open cloud operations model. For example, techniques from  Site Reliability
Engineering (SRE), GitOps and AIOps are expected to help shape the solutions. Whatever the ultimate
model, the project will determine a workable path forward for continuous improvement toward achieving
an Operate First methodology for open source. DevOps into a live production cloud for open source
projects will go a long way to ensuring functionality as well as operability.

Resources such as the Mass Open Cloud will allow developer access for vetting their open source
projects for both functional and operational aspects.